That was a real exciting time, and a time to see how a
lot of decisions are brought together with a
consensus.
You see where certain individuals have
an influence, but in the long term it was a positive
influence. because it was the right thing for us to
do and it was something that I think brought a later
cooperation and support from some of the
political people to help this university move
forward. And no scars. And no scars. No political
public scars at all. Virtually none. You know I got
a few letters. Oh yeah. from alumni that just were
so loyal to the old Southwest Conference, but it
was dead. It was gone, and we were riding a horse
that was lame and was going to become a dead horse,
quite honestly. When you walked in as the chief
executive officer of the institution, what were
the important matters that you had to take up right
then? Well, the first one was clearly to finish up
the investigation of the NCAA issue. The second
one was to keep the momentum going in two areas. One
was the academic priorities that we had put in
place. And the second one was the endowment
campaign. We had a lot of major requests out. And
the goal was $500 million. It wound up
successfully afterwards at more than $600
million. So it was to not let that momentum get
restricted in any way and to keep that ball
rolling. On that one? I had one other one. Wait,
wait, wait. On that campaign, does John Lindsay
deserve a pat on the back? Absolutely. John
Lindsay got a great pat on the back, and so did Bill
Lone Star Gaze.
I don't know. Oh, man. We'll think of it later.
I'll come up with his name. Anyway, they deserved a
tremendous pat on the back. As well as did Eddie Joe
Davis, who was president of the foundation. And I
traveled this state that year speaking to former
students groups and telling them what we were
doing. And it's real encouraging when you go share
and you talk about the Aggie tradition, the Aggie
family, the Aggie students. the Aggie Honor Code,
and when you finish they give you a standing
ovation. And you meet so many wonderful people
that believe in what we're doing. Describe the
working relationship as you saw it in action
between the foundation and the institution. That
was a very strong relationship because And I don't
know a whole lot of the history prior to the time
that Bill Mobley was president and then
Chancellor and Eddie Joe Davis was the president.
But the two of them had worked together in the
Chancellor's office to the point that a
partnership was already there. I do think that
they built probably a stronger, closer
relationship than had been there ever before. And
what we did that really made a difference was that
we put development officers in all of the
colleges, and I even put one in the provost office,
so that we could get a lot of scholarship money,
that we could bring in programs that would help
strengthen the undergraduate programs, would
help recruitment of top quality students to this
university. And I put one over in the student
service side. because great opportunities for
John Colas and later Maylyn Sutherland to build up
those areas that we weren't going to get
additional state funding and the only way that we
could continue to have excellence was to bring in
outside money. You started to add another item a
while ago and I interrupted you. Other things that
were on the table that you needed to deal with? One
other major thing that was on the table was the
requirement for multicultural
courses. And I put a lot of study into that and
determined that the agenda that was put forth was
not a lot of the agenda that some people had in mind,
and I vetoed it. And it created one big furor. I had
to go meet an executive session with the faculty
senate, and they could not believe that a
president of the university had vetoed an
academic faculty decision in the hundred and
almost twenty year history of the university. I
made the statement, well, they may not have
before, but one has now. And I tried to give them my
reasons. I doubt that they were all accepted. I had
one or two other groups that I had worked so hard
with to increase the minority students, the
minority faculty. They wanted me to explain my
reasoning why. And I think they accepted it right
and well.
I spent a lot of time going out into high schools
across the state, both as senior vice president
students.
But that was something on my plate. I probably got
500 letters of support to any one letter that was
negative about it. Those were probably the major
issues that were on my plate with the exception of
the
kinds of things that resulted after an anonymous
letter was sent to the Dallas Morning News about
suspicion of improprieties in certain areas of
the
there are questions about
they did it was a board they did not think it was my
responsibility but it was laid on my lap an issue I
had to handle because there were
procedures in the whole university business
operation of the approval of those that was using
the wrong terminology. And I promise you there was
never any mal-intent. There was never, as far as I
could determine, ever misuse of any funds for the
purchase. But the codes and the titling of what was
put on there was clearly wrong. So I had to deal with
that. I inherited these things I'm telling you
about. There were accusations that the contract
of the bookstore with Barnes and Noble was not done
properly. There were accusations that there were
problems in the food service department and
people had been dismissed for wrong reasons. I had
a chemistry professor that was trying to make gold
out of mercury. And they said, well, he got a gift
that shouldn't have been given. Well, there was no
way of knowing that on the front end of that gift.
And the guy was later gotten in trouble with the
FBI. But how were we to know any of that part? So, you
know, I had a lot of those things laid on my table
that It took up a tremendous amount of time just to
straighten them out. Did any regent attempt to
give you, as you began, attempt to give you
direction, personal direction? I would not say
that any regent tried to give me personal
direction, but it was not probably uncommon for a
regent to call me with a an issue that they wanted to
see addressed. And I think that has happened for
many, many years. Right. Don't name the region.
Give some examples of the kinds of things you...
Some, you know, they would get a complaint about
something happening in a classroom or with a
student. some of those kinds of things. Did they
ever want anyone terminated? No, I never had that.
Did you get any memorable phone calls in the middle
of the night about anything? I got very few for
probably one reason. I had an unlisted number and I
did that just simply so I could get rest and sleep at
night.
You know, I would get a few where There was a major
issue
with a student, a tragedy, for instance, a student
got killed. And I'm trying to recall, when you
serve in three consecutive roles, sometimes
you're not sure which role you were in when
something came up. We had some instances in the
Corps, and I would get those kinds of calls from one
of the vice presidents or something. I'll tell you
one of the most interesting calls I ever got was at
the Cotton Boat. And it was from Malin Sutherland,
who I had named as Vice President for Student
Affairs. And Malin called me and he said,
Reveille's been stolen. And I said, you gotta be
kidding me. And here we are. right in the middle of
all this Cotton Bowl celebration, and the next day
is the march in with Reveille, and Reveille's been
stolen. And we think it's by University of Texas
students. That was a late night call. And so we
began to work through all of that, and before game
time, we had Reveille back. Had Reveille been
stolen? Absolutely. She'd been stolen from the
backyard of the young man in Dallas who kept her.
And this was when she was a pup. And what had
happened was the Dallas Morning News had a
beautiful article when the new Reveille was
chosen. The young man that was responsible for
Revel, he lived in Dallas. And being Dallas, well,
they made a nice article out of it and how he would be
in charge of it. Well, some UT students apparently
knew where he lived. went and stole Reveille.
And they never let Reveille out of their sight
except that morning they opened the door, let
Reveille go into the fenced backyard with a high
fence to go to the bathroom. And apparently that
student must have already been hiding in the dark
in the yard and stole Reveille. And I was on the
phone to the president at UT And he was willing to
get the bottom of it, because there'd be egg on
their face. And he was so cooperative. This is
Berdahl, who is now, I believe, president at
Stanford. And he was so cooperative. And we got to
the bottom of it before the game time.
And you inherited a staff in the president's
office. Yes, I inherited a staff in the
president's office. with the exception of the
administrative assistant to the president, and I
had taken and I took with me my assistant from the
provost office. Who's that? Sandy Crawford, and
she is still there to this day. Okay, yes. And your
office was located physically, President's
office. In Rudder. In Rudder. Eighth floor. On the
eighth floor where it is now. What are the
advantages and disadvantages of that location?
The advantages,
most of all, is that it is right in the heart and
center of campus. And you see everything around
you. And you look out over the mall, you see all the
students. But also, it's so convenient to the
president's home, to the parking, and to the MSC,
and to the board quarters, or the Board of Regents
facilities. And it's central. to wherever else
you might go on campus. The central location's a
great advantage. Image-wise, it might have been
better for it to have been in the administration
building, that beautiful old chancellor's
office that I had when I was provost, but
image-wise for the students, it's better to be in
the heart of the campus where it was.
If you were going to have a small luncheon for a few
people, where did you have it? Almost always in the
Memorial Student Center. Or if it were during the
day, usually in the Memorial Student Center.
Sometimes
I guess at least half of them though would be in the
Alumni Center, in the Clayton Williams Alumni
Center. And then if it were night, probably the
President's Hall. We probably had more dinners at
night that were smaller in size at the Alumni
Center. Did you use the faculty club much? Yes, I
did. I used the faculty club a good bit. for fairly
small groups, and I forgot to mention that one. And
I had a lot of real small luncheons there where I'd
have a small group in because it's so convenient to
just go to the faculty club. Plus, that is a great
place to recruit when you can show them the entire
campus by walking around. As a sidelight, I was on
the committee to plan the rudder expansion and all
that, and one of the questions that we as the
committee threw at the architect over and over and
over again and got overruled by people in building
construction over and over, we were saying why in
the world put the facility in the middle of that
floor, why not put it off at one side and have where
you could have maybe 200 people up there, make it
where it could be divided and we got overruled over
and over. Yeah, because you can't see in any one of
those sides, a very large group at all.
When did they start the search for the presidency
on a permanent basis? Probably no later than
October of 93. And was it, by the current
standards, a normal search, meaning an
advertisement and a committee? Yes, it was a
completely normal nationwide search. Okay. And
what was your desire? Well, I allowed myself. I
knew I would be nominated. A lot of faculty and a lot
of administrators
even wanted the name interim probably taken off,
but I allowed my name to go forward. But my wife and I
were giving deep thought as to whether or not after
that many years at that kind of pace and level and
just the issues that we were having to face and to
clean up, whether we really wanted to make a
long-term commitment to it. And when it got past
the interview process,
we both decided that we wanted some time back
together for our family and for us. And I notified
the chairman of the committee that I was
withdrawing.
That was a tough decision. In many ways my heart
wanted to continue to do it. But in another way, I
felt like it might also be an appropriate time for
an outside person because of a lot of the issues
that I had had to work so hard to resolve. And I'm
talking about the alcohol, food service, the
NCAA, all of those. I could go on, there's a long
list of them. There was another issue of a
co-generation
contract, and all of those kinds of things that
someone, with no history of being here could step
into. And I felt, I think, blessed at the end that I
was able to resolve every one of those before I left
so that I wasn't going to leave a lot of that for
someone else. And I wondered, you know, what am I
going to do? And there was an opportunity. that
really was down my line of interest to go to the
College of Business and become the director of the
Center for Executive Development and teach an
honors course in leadership. And although I could
look back and say my discipline had been
veterinary medicine, my true discipline had
always been leadership.
That's where my heart had always been. So, I really
got excited about that being a possibility and
that's what happened when we stepped out in 94.
Alright, and so you told them that you would not be
considered anymore at about what point? That was
probably in March or April of 94. I indicated to
them that I was withdrawing. and that I would
support whomever they selected and would help
that individual as much as I could. And the
eventual choice was Ray Bowen? Correct. And as far
as you know, was that the committee's
recommendation? As far as I know, he was the
committee's recommendation. And he was then the
interim president at Oklahoma State. At Oklahoma
State. Did he communicate with you soon after he
was selected? Yes. And before he came, too, I sat
down and wrote out everything I could think of that
was on the table, that was unresolved, and sat down
with him. when he first got here and went over
everything I could think of.
I don't recall if he ever asked me for any advice,
but I could not help remember what Bill Mobley told
me. I asked Bill, I said, what advice would you give
me stepping into this role as leading this
university? He said, communicate, communicate,
communicate. And had Ray asked me, and he may have,
I don't recall, I would probably have said the same
thing. How important do you think it was and is for a
Texas A&M former student to be the chief executive
officer of this institution? Well, it's a great
asset because you come with such an understanding
and just a knowledge of all of the traditions and
what a special place this is. Clearly, I think Jack
Williams and Bill Mobley demonstrate that you
don't have to be an Aggie to be a president here.
That very quickly becomes an Aggie, but it puts you
ahead of the learning curve to understand the
values, the traditions, to understand the former
students. And it clearly is an asset. There is no
question about it. Now what topics have we not
talked about in your campus-wide leadership
months and years? You were at the campus level how
from? From 89, actually the end of 88 to 94. So six
years. Six years.
I don't know, if you were to ask me what the most
enjoyable times were, to me it would clearly be the
interaction with students, former students, and
the Mother's Club. Those were times where I could
get to go and, quite frankly, tout, brag about the
university. and to tell them what was happening
and where we were going and what our vision was of
where A&M was going. And you could see their
enthusiasm, their excitement to know that here
A&M was now the third largest university in the
nation. It was one of a select designated few that
was land grant, sea grant, and space grant. And I
would tell them, to me that meant another
obligation. that we were a public grant, a student
grant, and a parent grant. Well, when I meshed
those together with it, they could just grasp that
and know that our heart was trying to maintain the
value systems and the traditions of this
university, and at the same time put in place the
academic enhancements and programs that would
elevate us to a national level that they would be
proud to see us achieve and what part they could
play in it. So those were, those were terrifically
exciting times and I probably missed that more
than any other thing. They were tiring, you know,
when you go get on an airplane after work at six
o'clock and fly to Tyler, Texas and speak and get
back about midnight that night. It was a part of it,
and I must tell you, I poured my heart and soul into
it and gave 80, 90 hours a week to it. Any scary
moments on those flights? Oh, man, did we have a
scary one. We had gone to the opening of the new
outreach center in Corpus Christi, and this was
for the recruitment of students to Texas A&M. And
on that plane was a young lady In the outreach
office here, that was her first plane ride, and we
were coming back on the University Airplane, and
we got just this side of Caldwell, and there was a
horrendous thunderstorm just, I guess, west of
Easterwood, and the pilot thought on radar, and we
were looking at the radar, that we could see a
window through it. So he started through that
window and we got sideways. And in fact, when we got
sideways, he turned around and he said, you better
tighten your seat belts. This is going to be rough.
And he could not get through it. So he circled back
and tried it one more time. And again, we got
sideways. We flew to Austin, sat down at the state
pooling board airport. for four hours to let that
blow through before we ever got back. But that was a
scary plane ride. What about celebrities that you
met or dealt with during those six years? Oh,
golly, there were a number.
Chuck Norris from TV fame was here. He sat in the the
presidents, Box, Linda Ellerby,
you know, probably the ones that I have the
greatest respect for would be George and Barbara
Bush because they were so humble and just down to
earth people and I will never forget how funny she
could be. And we were over in the Board of Regents
quarters with a reception for them one evening
before a football weekend. And the Board of
Regents and MSC quarters have always been known as
having great air conditioning. And I must admit,
it was cool in there. But you turn it down pretty
cool because you get all the people in there.
Bill's up. She was there. And it was pretty cold
that night, and she comes up to me, and I was provost
at the time, and she says, I want to ask you
something. And I said, yes, ma'am. She said, is a
provost supposed to save money for the
university? And I said, yes, ma'am, every chance I
can get. She said, well, why don't you go tell them
to turn the air conditioning up? And that was just
her way. Let's see, any sessions with the
governor, one-on-one or almost one-on-one?
Yeah, I had a number of sessions with Ann Richards,
who was the governor at the time. And she had us
being the leadership of the university over to the
mansion for a dinner one night. And that was a
one-on-one. And then we had, as I recall, two or
three separate meetings just one-on-one with
certain kinds of issues that we were facing. I'll
tell you, another one is when we were trying to get
appropriations through the highway department
to widen George Bush Boulevard. I went with a group
of business leaders from the community and we met
with her asking her if she would help us with funds
that were already into the Highway Department to
get it allocated to be able to forlain it because we
were now going to get the George Bush Library. And
she came along with it. Did you get any impression
of how she felt about A&M in general? I think she had
respect for A&M, but probably the conservative
nature and voting record of this university more
toward Republican, her greater loyalty would
probably have been to the University of Texas. But
she was always very respectful and I think had a
great deal of admiration for this university.
She gave a commencement address, so we were with
her at that time. In fact, when you're senior vice
president and provost, one of your
responsibilities at commencement is to
entertain the speaker after the speaker has
spoken and all the students are going across. So I
spent a good bit of time in conversation when she
spoke. That brings up another thing that happened
when I was Senior Vice President, Provost.
We always, those of us on stage, got into the
Letterman's Lounge in G. Raleigh White about 10
minutes before the procession. And this was on a
Saturday morning and we didn't have a meal
beforehand. So we just came directly from home to
G. Raleigh White. And I got there. about 10 minutes
till 9 when we were to robe and proceed in. And I walk
in, and everybody looks at me. And they point at me,
and Bill Mobley says, the speaker for
commencement this morning is fogged in in Austin.
You're on. Well, you can imagine what I thought.
And I had given a lot of speeches. I thought, what in
the world am I going to do? So I said, okay. I said,
but I need to run to my office, which was over on the
administration building, way across campus, and
be able to go in and get an old speech, and maybe I can
write it.